Abstract
========

*This paper introduces the "Emerging Technology Analysis Canvas" (ETAC),
a framework to assess an individual emerging technology. Inspired by the
Business Analysis Canvas, this approach includes a set of questions that
probe the technology arranged around a logic narrative. it represents
different aspects of technology visually. The visual representation is
concise, compact, and comprehensible in a glance. We believe it provide
a logical framework to understand the technology, provides a framework
to look at different aspects of the technology, and can be used as a
brainstorming tool when trying to understand emerging technologies.*

Introduction
============

This paper introduces the "Emerging Technology Analysis Canvas"(ETAC), a
framework to assess an individual emerging technology. Many
technological organisations have a desire to evaluate emerging
technologies, either for their own Research and Development teams
benefit or for the benefit of their customers and partners. This work
was inspired by the authors' desire to formalise our analysis of
technologies that are relevant to our work. We took inspiration from the
Business Analysis Canvas \[4\]. The rest of this paper is laid out as
follows. The first section discusses why such a framework is required.
The second presents the canvas, as well as demonstrating its use with a
specific emerging technology. Finally, the third section draws
conclusions and identifies further areas of research.

A Case for a Framework
======================

Throughout history, we have seen the emergence of many different
technologies. Some have died and some have merely survived; however,
some have woven themselves into today\'s world so well that we do not
even notice them. An organization must be aware of those trends to
interact with such technologies, to build on them, and sometimes even to
shape them. During this process, an organization will greatly benefit
from objective analysis and a deeper understanding of the impact and
probability of success for each emerging technology. The response to
emerging technologies often decides the fate of organizations. It pays
to be correct.

Assessing a technology is a subjective exercise. It is driven more by
judgment and less by numbers. There is always a risk of
unknown-unknowns, overlooking side effects, and bias stemming from
preconceived notions \[1,3\]. Successful analysis often results not from
haphazard judgments but from a well-designed framework, a framework that
asks hard questions, a framework that compares and contrasts, and
criticises what is known and what is not.

One way of doing this is a list of questions \[2\]. Well-designed
questions force us to think, provide honest answers, and consider
multi-level effects. Here are some examples:

1.  What causes the trend (5-Whys \[5\])?

2.  Who will benefit? Who will be in trouble?

3.  What trends is it affecting or affected by?

4.  What resource does it need?

5.  Can current policy and law handle the deployment and side effect of
    > the technology? How will policymakers react to the technology?

6.  How long does it take to hit 16% (Crossing the chasm \[6\])?

7.  What problems will it solve? What are direct, second level, and
    > *n*th level repercussions \[7\]?

8.  What revenue streams will it create for a participating
    > organization? What business models will it enable worldwide?

9.  What are the risks? What is the biggest risk?

10. What were similar trends? What happened to them?

While questions are a powerful tool, they have several weaknesses. They
are neither concise nor compact. Hence they do not help us get a bigger
picture or to understand things in different levels of abstractions.
Visual representations, in contrast, are concise, compact, and
comprehensible in a glance. Furthermore, questions themselves, without a
structure to guide them, do not help us cover multiple aspects. Hence,
we do not know what questions we may have overlooked. Having a
structured approach, into which the questions can be fitted, allows us
to use a set of questions as tools probing the different aspects of a
phenomenon. A visual format also enables the relationship between the
questions to be part of the analysis. This gives us an additional chance
to identify the gaps.

While trying to build a structure for questions, we found inspiration
from the [[Business Model
Canvas]{.underline}](https://strategyzer.com/canvas/business-model-canvas)
\[4\]. Introduced by Alexander Osterwalder, it is a set of questions and
a narrative designed to critically analyze different aspects of a
business: the value proposition, customer segments, channels, and
revenue pitted against activities and costs. Its real strength lies in
the narrative that links its questions into a coherent whole. It is
designed as a one-page narrative, which is to be printed out and used as
a brainstorming tool in conjunction with post-it notes.

Emerging Technology Analysis Canvas
===================================

We propose an Emerging Technology Analysis Canvas (ETAC), which is built
around similar concepts as the Business Model Canvas, but targeting
emerging technology assessment. The ETAC provides a methodology for a
structured analysis of emerging technology. The process of filling out
the ETAC informs the study of the technology and creates a holistic
approach to analysing emerging approaches.

Based on our experience in emerging technology, we see that the success
of an emerging technology needs four main factors:

1.  The identification of a problem and a related innovation that
    > addresses the problem[^1].

2.  The technology has to have a significant potential impact (often
    > beyond the initial problem).

3.  The technology has to be feasible given the available resources

4.  There are risks related to technology development and adoption which
    > the emerging technology must navigate (e.g., the technology should
    > develop and be adopted fast enough to justify any investment).
    > ~~to navigate any risks~~

As shown in the figure, the canvas is built around the above four
elements. Each subsection drills down the details.

The graphical representation of the ETAC (Figure 1) is very concise,
compact, i.e. one can literally see a whole spectrum of aspects of a
technology at a glance, on a single page. This significantly encourages
a holistic comprehension so that the evaluators can then look deeper and
ask more informed questions specific to certain focuses.

![](media/image3.png){width="6.5in" height="4.597222222222222in"}*Figure
1 - the Emerging Technology Analysis Canvas (ETAC)*

Let's explore the canvas in detail.

*The ETAC is typically filled-in and read from left-to-right and then
top-to-bottom.*

The *opportunity* captures problem and the innovation that acts as a
trigger and the current state of the market.

Opportunity

-   Trigger - A problem and a solution that captured broader imagination
    > which later evolved to technology and promise to solve broader
    > problems. For example, serverless is triggered by the need to
    > reduce the granularity of payments and management overhead, which
    > solved by Amazon Lambda.

-   Players - What organizations or individuals are actively shaping the
    > technology? For example, Amazon, Microsoft, and IBM are active in
    > serverless.

The ETAC considers two types of impact: macro and micro. The macro
impact captures the effects of technology on the industry as a whole.
The micro impact captures the impact seen by individual organizations.

Macro Impact - discusses the impact on the industry under the following
three themes.

-   Network effects - The potential impact on the industry if a majority
    > adopted the technology. For example, if a majority adopted
    > Serverless, most integrations will occur in the cloud. This would
    > reduce serverless latency problems, which, in turn, would further
    > propel Serverless. We should ask what if most people have adopted
    > the technology and explored how it can either help or disrupt
    > technology users. Griffin \[9\] discusses the network effects in
    > detail.

-   Disruptees and Interactions - What technologies or industries will
    > be affected by the emerging technology? The effects are twofold:
    > the industries that compete with the emerging technology will be
    > challenged, while the industries that complement it will be
    > propelled. For example, AI may propel disease diagnosis, but it
    > may reduce jobs for doctors. There are impact areas we need to
    > consider. First is to explore the impact of technology on
    > middleware segments (Applications, Integration, Observability,
    > Storage, Infrastructure, Security, and IoT) and other emerging
    > technologies. Second is to consider PESTLE framework \[10\] to
    > consider political, economic, socio-cultural, technological,
    > legal, and environmental impact of the technology. We need to
    > consider not the first level effect, rather nth level effects as
    > described by \[7\]. Part of this analysis is considering any
    > crossover potential of the technology where it solves a
    > fundamental problem in a different industry or a segment and
    > unlocks a wave of advance.

Micro Impact - discusses the impact on the organization under the
following four themes.

-   Competition - How does the emerging technology affect competition
    > between organizations? For example, Serverless provides agility,
    > which gives organizations an advantage because agility enables
    > them to respond to changing conditions faster.

-   Cost - Does the emerging technology lower costs? For example, AI can
    > automate human tasks, thus reducing cost.

-   Customers - Does the emerging technology affect customers? For
    > example, due to API technology, more and more customers will ask
    > for features as APIs.

-   Partners - Does the emerging technology affect the partners? For
    > example, due to Blockchain technology, partners can make contracts
    > on the fly without third parties (e.g. banks, escrows).

While exploring the impact of technology, we should ask how the
technology can provide advantages such as cost savings, agility,
productivity, integration, trust, communication, and loose-coupling as a
direct impact or indirect impact. Furthermore, we should as whether
technology can reduce the challenges such as lack of programmers,
privacy, complexity, security risks, monopoly/ vendor as a direct impact
or indirect impact.

A technology is useful if the promise can live up to expectations, if
programmers who can build expected systems are widely available, and if
the technology can work with existing systems.

Feasibility

-   Technical Merit - Is the technology based on sound theoretical
    > underpinnings? For example, serverless would provide
    > out-of-the-box high availability (HA) support, but it has a higher
    > number of cold starts and tail latencies.

-   Tools and ecosystem - Does the emerging technology have
    > sophisticated tools and a healthy ecosystem? For example,
    > Blockchain has a healthy developer community and tools.

-   Friction - What kind of friction will the emerging technology face
    > in its implementation? For example, moving an existing system to
    > serverless needs significant changes.

The future captures how the technology will evolve, the timeline and
risks.

Future

-   Timeline - How will the development of the emerging technology
    > progress over time? For example, Blockchain needs breakthroughs
    > before it is adopted widely it might take at least 5-10 years to
    > reach those milestones.

-   Risks - What are risks inherent to the technology? For example,
    > Vendor lock-in is a risk associated with the public cloud version
    > of serverless. Among other considerations are needed for
    > standrads, privacy concerns, business models, showstoppers that
    > limit the critical use cases, and Current Law and policy
    > frameworks.

Summary - the summary section should discuss possible outcomes weighing
in different parts of the structure (narrative) and order outcomes by
their likelihood. Following are some of the potential questions. Does
the impact be significant? If yes, given the impact and resources that
can be justified under the impact, is the technology is feasible? If
yes, can technology yield results before momentum is lost? If yes, can
technology navigate the risks associated with deployments and side
effects? This section is based on the expert judgment as it will be hard
to find concrete evidence to justify outcomes.

Just like the business model canvas, the Emerging Technology Analysis
Canvas can be used to ask questions, brainstorm, and draw conclusions.
It can also be used with post-it notes as a brainstorming tool.

An Example 
===========

In order to demonstrate the use of the ETAC, we have applied this tool
to the *serverless* domain. This description is a summarised version of
a full analysis of serverless domain that we have undertaken. We plan to
publish this separately.

Serverless is defined as Functions as a Service (FaaS), resources (
compute and storage) as well as complete execution environment including
platform services providing "Resource Pooling", "Rapid Elasticity",
"Measured Service"[^2].

![](media/image4.png){width="6.5in" height="4.625in"}

*Figure 2 -* *Serverless ETAC*

As the ETAC depicts, the serverless is triggered by competitively priced
FaaS offerings. Key players include Amazon, Google, Microsoft, IBM.

Considering organizational level impact, Serverless provide agility,
reduced development cost, reduced total cost of ownership, and cost
transparency. At the macro level, Serverless likely to have a symbiotic
relationship with Containers, APIs, and EDA but likely to hurt
Middleware, DevOps, and IDEs. Serverless can drive functional
disaggregation \[8\] by making it easy to implement the idea.
Furthermore, elevated serverless adoption likely to beget more adoption
as colocating logic in the same cloud as APIs can reduce the latency
imposed by the network calls in disaggregated applications.

Considering feasibility, Serverless provides built-in scalability and
high availability. However, it has higher cold start latencies and tail
latencies. EDA based programming model imposed by Serverless is hard to
understand and debug. Lack of architectural skills and lack of tools
with integrated support for serverless development and debugging likely
to be a challenge.

Serverless enable polyglot programming increasing flexibility. Also, it
reduces the abstractions programmers required to understand hence push
the skill limit required by programmers.

On the other hand, it can face friction because Serverless is
opinionated, because systems must be redone to switch to serverless,
support and customer service, and because the support model is
different. Furthermore, Serverless faces risks due to a lack of
standards and potential vendor lock-in.

The primary challenge is tooling. Latency and vendor lock-in concerns
can limit use cases but likely not be a show stopper. Assuming tools can
catch up, we believe most new projects will use serverless within next
five years.

You can find a detailed discussion of the aforementioned observations
from Serverless Outlook
([[http://wso2.com/gto/serverless-outlook-2018/]{.underline}](http://wso2.com/gto/serverless-outlook-2018/)).

Methodology
===========

So far we discussed how the ETAC will look like in the finished form.
This section discusses the methodology for building it.

Introduction of the ETAC includes some useful questions that can be
asked as part of the analysis of each section. Applying an outlook to a
technology includes following steps.

1.  We presented a working definition of the technology to make it clear
    > what is included and not included

2.  An extensive literature survey to understand the opinions and
    > evidence expressed with respect to the technology and we try to
    > answer the questions asked by ETAC, any detailed questions
    > mentioned in the description, any questions specific to the
    > technology. We defneded each fact we presented in the Opportunity,
    > Impact, and Feasibility either using references to related sources
    > or presenting evidence.

3.  Future and summary weigh those facts and possible futures and
    > provides our expert observations and opinions on evolution and
    > future of the technology.

The last step is the most challenging part of the ETAC as it deals with
the future. Following are some of the methods that might be useful in
making a decision.

We can start by asking is the core technology is ready and if not how
seen it is likely to achieve. Unless core technology is ready, the next
steps depend on technological breakthroughs, which are harder to
predict. An Important idea in this analysis Dominant Design \[11\],
which is critical technological features that become a de facto
standard. We can explore whether a dominant design has been achieved.

Then we can explore the technology stage of progress as per Gartner hype
cycle \[12\] the Carlota Perez Framework \[13\] and "EU Technology
readiness levels" \[14\].

Further, we can evaluate the technology using Everett M. Rogers' Five
Factors explaining adoption rate: (Tech delta, Compatibility,
Simplicity, Trialability, Observability) \[15\]. Also, we can use
Rogers' diffusion of innovation curve to discuss the current status quo.

To evaluate the timeline, we can consider the following factors.

-   Can the technology achieve critical mass to hit chasm? When?

-   The impact from megatrends (digitization, urbanization,
    > globalization, climate change, aging population)

-   The impact of technology trends

-   The capital requirement, production costs, delivery models

-   How much coordination deployment of X needs?

ETAC is an amalgamation of answers to the above questions and any other
ideas the practitioner brings in. Each idea should be discussed in
detail in a separate supporting document to convey the arguments
supporting the visual canvas.

Conclusion
==========

The Emerging Technology Analysis Canvas (ETAC) provides a framework to
analyze emerging technologies objectively. It includes questions that
highlight different aspects of an emerging technology and a visual
narrative that connects those questions to a coherent whole.

We designed it as part of the methodology for WSO2's Global Technology
Outlook (GTO), which identifies emerging technology trends, classifies
them based on their potential, and assesses a relevant subset of those
trends in detail.

We discussed why the ETAC is needed and presented it in detail.

References
==========

1.  Buster Benson, "Cognitive Bias Cheat Sheet",
    > [https://betterhumans.coach.me/cognitive-bias-cheat-sheet-55a472476b18]{.underline}

2.  Frank Sesno, "Ask More: The Power of Questions to Open Doors,
    > Uncover Solutions, and Spark Change",
    > [[https://www.amazon.com/Ask-More-Questions-Uncover-Solutions-ebook/dp/B01HUER128/]{.underline}](https://www.amazon.com/Ask-More-Questions-Uncover-Solutions-ebook/dp/B01HUER128/)

3.  "Charlie Munger on the Psychology of Human Misjudgement",
    > [https://buffettmungerwisdom.files.wordpress.com/2013/01/mungerspeech\_june\_95.pdf]{.underline}

4.  Alexander Osterwalder, "Business Model Canvas",
    > [[https://strategyzer.com/canvas/business-model-canvas]{.underline}](https://strategyzer.com/canvas/business-model-canvas)

5.  5 Whys,
    > [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/5\_Whys]{.underline}](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/5_Whys)

6.  Geoffrey A. Moore, "Crossing the Chasm: Marketing and Selling
    > High-Tech Products to Mainstream Customers",
    > [[https://www.amazon.com/Crossing-Chasm-Marketing-High-Tech-Mainstream/dp/0060517123]{.underline}](https://www.amazon.com/Crossing-Chasm-Marketing-High-Tech-Mainstream/dp/0060517123)

7.  "Second-Order Thinking",
    > [[https://fs.blog/2016/04/second-order-thinking/]{.underline}](https://fs.blog/2016/04/second-order-thinking/)

8.  "The Rise of APIs",
    > [[https://techcrunch.com/2016/05/21/the-rise-of-apis/]{.underline}](https://techcrunch.com/2016/05/21/the-rise-of-apis/)

9.  Tren Griffin, "Two Powerful Mental Models: Network Effects and
    > Critical Mass",
    > https://a16z.com/2016/03/07/network-effects\_critical-mass/

10. "What is PESTLE Analysis? A Tool for Business Analysis",
    > [http://pestleanalysis.com/what-is-pestle-analysis/]{.underline}

11. "Dominant Design",
    > [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dominant\_design]{.underline}

12. "Gartner Hype Cycle", https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hype\_cycle

13. "The Carlota Perez Framework",
    > [[https://avc.com/2015/02/the-carlota-perez-framework/]{.underline}](https://avc.com/2015/02/the-carlota-perez-framework/)

14. "EU Technology Readiness Level",
    > [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technology\_readiness\_level]{.underline}](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technology_readiness_level)

15. Everett M. Rogers, "Diffusion of Innovations",
    > [https://www.amazon.com/Diffusion-Innovations-5th-Everett-Rogers/dp/0743222091]{.underline}

[^1]: We consider that these two must come in conjunction, because often
    the innovation changes our perception of the problem.

[^2]: The three terms are defined in NIST cloud computing definition.
